=========================================================
PLEP-0009 – Release schedule and long-term support policy
=========================================================

+-------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| PLEP              | number                                      |
+===================+=============================================+
| author(s)         | Nicholas A. Murphy                          |
+-------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| contact email     | namurphy@cfa.harvard.edu                    |
+-------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| date created      | *YYYY-MM-DD*                                |
+-------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| date last revised | *YYYY-MM-DD*                                |
+-------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| type              | process                                     |
+-------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| status            | discussion                                  |
+-------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| DOI               |                                             |
|                   |                                             |
+-------------------+---------------------------------------------+

Abstract
========

This PLEP describes the nominal release schedule and long-term support
(LTS) policy for PlasmaPy.

Detailed Description
====================

Release schedule
----------------

Feature releases of PlasmaPy will be scheduled for January, May, and
September of each year, and maintained with backwards compatible bug
fixes and documentation improvements until the next feature release.

Python support policy
---------------------

For consistency with NumPy Enhancement Proposal 29, each feature
release will be compatible with minor versions of Python released in
the prior 42 months and minor versions of NumPy released in the prior
24 months. Because Python minor releases occur each October, the May
release of PlasmaPy will drop support of the oldest-supported version
of Python. For example, the May 2025 release of Python will drop
compatibility with Python 3.10 and require Python 3.11 or newer.

Long-term support policy
------------------------

If there is sufficient funding for the development and maintenance of
PlasmaPy, then the first release in even-numbered years will be an LTS
release that will be maintained with bugfixes and documentation
improvements for two years.

Implementation
==============

To implement this PLEP, it will be necessary to implement
infrastructure for performing backports for LTS releases. For example,
when a pull request for Astropy is labeled as appropriate for a
backport, then a GitHub tool will automatically create a pull request
to the appropriate branches. This infrastructure will reduce the
effort needed to perform backports and minor releases.

Alternatives
============

Feature release cadence
-----------------------

This PLEP specifies a feature release cadence of four months.

* A less frequent release schedule would reduce the amount of effort
  by developers, but would delay new features being made available to
  new users. Too much time between releases would also increase the
  risk that developers would forget how to perform the releases.

* A more frequent release schedule would enable features to become
  available to users more quickly, but with the tradeoffs of
  additional work overhead for each release, less stability for
  users, and more difficulty keeping track of citations.

A release cadence of four months balances these tradeoffs.

Decision Rationale
==================

*Summarize the discussion on this PLEP and describe the reasoning
behind the decision, if necessary.*

*Not all PLEPs require all of these sections, and occasionally
additional sections may be necessary. Emphasized text should be
deleted.*
